Jeremy Forbes
Monash University
ADDRESS Clayton
Clayton, VIC, Australia 3187
+61434115453
jeremy.forbes@monash.edu

Dr. James Curran
Editor-in-Chief
Australian and New Zealand Journal of Statistics


INSERT-DATE

Dear Dr. Curran,

I am pleased to submit an original research article entitled "Spatial modelling of the two-party preferred vote in Australian federal elections: 2001--2016" by Jeremy Forbes, Di Cook and Rob Hyndman for consideration for publication in the Australian and New Zealand Journal of Statistics. This study examines the socio-demographic drivers of Australian electoral preference between the Labor and Liberal parties over the six federal elections from 2001 to 2016, using a regression framework. 

There exist a handful of previous studies that analyze the relationship between aggregate socio-demographic characteristics and voter behaviour in Australian federal elections. In these studies, voting outcomes are joined to the most recent Census data in order construct socio-demographic profiles for each aggregate voting area, and it is found that socio-demographics are good predictors of both Liberal and Labor party support. However, applications of statistics in this area are limited to the elections up to and including 2007 and are focused on polling booths rather than electorates (a polling booth is an aggregate unit smaller than the electorate). The methods used include stepwise regression and principal component analysis to identify influential characterstics.

In this paper, we model each of the six federal elections between 2001 and 2016 using a regression framework so that the temporal trends in socio-demographics can be observed over time. As in the existing literature, Census and election data is used. However, unlike the previous studies, we account for the inherent spatial and temporal misalignments between Census and election data. For each of the 2004, 2007, 2010 and 2013 elections, electoral socio-demographics are imputed using data from the Censuses both before and after the election. This is required as a Census does not occur in these election years. Furthermore, we model spatial strucutre of electorates in our regression models so that the political climate (an unobserved influence on two-party preference) in neighbouring electorates can effect an electorate's own voting behaviour. This effect is found to be positive in all elections, although only significant in 2001 and 2016. Over time, the impact of most socio-demographic characteristics do not vary, with industry of work, incomes, household mobility and de facto relationships having consistently strong effects, whilst education and unemployment are amongst those that have varying effects.

We believe that this paper is appropriate for publication by the Australian and New Zealand Journal of Statistics because it applies statistical techniques to uncover insights in a topical problem, utilizes a method of adjusting for spatial and temporal differences between Census and election data, and also provides a resource for future research as all data featured in this study has been contributed to the `eechidna` `R` package (available on CRAN), so readers are able to access this data.

This manuscript has not been published and is not under consideration for publication elsewhere.  We have no conflicts of interest to disclose.

Thank you for your consideration!

Sincerely,

Jeremy Forbes,
Department of Econometrics and Business Statistics,
Monash University
